                                                                                                                        


Millennium  Prize  Description  and  Rules  
  
1.   The  Clay  Mathematics  Institute  (“CMI”)  has  named  seven  (7)  Millennium  Prize  Problems  
      (each,  a  “Problem”).  CMI    selected  these  Problems,  focusing  on  important  classic  questions  
      that  have  resisted  solution  over  the  years.  Official  descriptions  of  the  Problems  are  available  
      at  https://www.claymath.org/millennium-­problems.    
2.   CMI    has  designated  a  $7  million  prize  fund  for  the  solutions  to  these  Problems,  with  $1  
      million  allocated  to  each  Problem  (each,  a  “Prize”).  Below  are  the  Rules  for  qualifying  for  
      award  of  a  Prize  for  solving  any  Problem.      
3.   General  Provisions:  
           a.   CMI,  and  no  other  persons  or  body,  has  the  sole  authority  to  award  and  authorize  
                payment  of  Prizes,  and  to  modify  or  interpret  these  Rules  in  its  sole  discretion.  
           b.   CMI  may,  in  its  sole  discretion,  consult  with,  and  receive  advice  from,  the  Scientific  
                Advisory  Board  of  CMI  and  others  in  connection  with  application  and  interpretation  of  
                these  rules,  evaluation  of  proposed  solutions  to  the  Problems  that  are  considered  by  
                CMI,  and  award  of  Prizes,  although  CMI  is  not  obligated  to  follow  such  advice.  
           c.   All  decisions  and  actions    by  CMI  with  respect  to  the  interpretation  and  application  of  
                these  Rules.  and  decisions  whether,  when,  to  whom    and  under  what  conditions  
                Prizes  should  be  awarded,  are  final.        
           d.   All  decision-­making  procedures  concerning  the  Problems  and  Prizes  are  and  shall  
                remain  private  and  confidential.  This  includes  the  deliberations  or  recommendations  
                of  any  person  or  persons  CMI  has  used  to  obtain  advice  on  this  question.  No  records  
                of  these  deliberations  or  related  correspondence  may  be  made  public  without  the  
                prior  approval  of  the  BOD  and  the  SAB  unless  fifty  (50)  years  time  have  elapsed  
                after  the  date  of  such  deliberations  or  correspondence  in  question.    Persons  whose  
                Proposed  Solutions  (as  defined  below)  are  evaluated  by  CMI  shall  not  be  entitled  to,  
                and  shall  not  receive,  an  explanation  regarding  CMI’s  decision  with  respect  to  the  
                Proposed  Solution.  
4.   Criteria  For  Prizes:  General  
CMI  may  award  a  Prize  in  connection  with  a  Proposed  Solution  (as  defined  below)  to  a  Problem  
if  and  only  if:  
           a.   the  Proposed  Solution  has  been  published  by  a  Qualifying  Outlet,  as  defined  below;;  
           b.   at  least  two  (2)  years  have  elapsed  since  publication  of  the  Proposed  Solution  in  a  
                Qualifying  Outlet;;  
           c.   the  Proposed  Solution  has  achieved  general  acceptance  in  the  global  mathematics  
                community,  as  determined  in  the  sole  discretion  of  CMI;;  and  
           d.   the  Proposed  Solution  has  satisfactorily  answered  the  questions  raised  by  the  
                Problem’s  official  description,  as  determined  in  the  sole  discretion  of  CMI.    
5.   Proposed  Solutions  
           a.   Only  a  complete  mathematical  solution  to  a  Problem  as  it  is  defined  in  its  official  
                Problem  description  (a  “Proposed  Solution”)  will  be  eligible  for  consideration  for  a  
                Prize.  Completeness  of  the  mathematical  solution  to  a  Problem  shall  be  determined  
                in  the  sole  discretion  of  CMI.  




{N0530588;;  1}  
  


        b.   In  the  case  of  the  P  versus  NP  Problem  and  the  Navier-­Stokes  Problem,  a  resolution  
             in  either  direction  will  be  evaluated  by  the  standard  evaluation  procedure  set  forth  in  
             Section  7.  
        c.   In  the  case  of  the  other  Problems,  if  a  counterexample  is  proposed,  such  
             counterexample  shall  be  evaluated  using  the  same  evaluation  procedure  as  if  it  were  
             a  Proposed  Solution.      
                  i.   If,  in  the  opinion  of  CMI,  the  counterexample  effectively  resolves  the  Problem,  
                         then  CMI  may  recommend  the  award  of  a  Prize.    
                  ii.   If,  alternatively,  the  counterexample  shows  that  the  original  Problem  survives  
                         after  reformulation  or  elimination  of  some  special  case,  then  CMI  may  
                         recommend  that  a  small  prize,  of  an  amount  to  be  determined  by  CMI  in  its  
                         sole  discretion,  be  awarded  to  the  author.  The  money  for  this  prize  will  not  be  
                         taken  from  the  Problem  fund,  but  from  other  CMI  funds.    
        d.   A  paper  that  does  not  address  or  refer  to  the  specific  mathematical  questions  set  out  
             in  detail  in  the  official  Problem  description  will  not  be  considered  to  be  a  Potential  
             Solution  of  one  of  the  Problems,  even  if  it  addresses  closely  related  scientific  
             questions.  
        e.   CMI  will  not  accept  Proposed  Solutions  submitted  directly  to  CMI  and  is  under  no  
             obligation  to  provide  explanation  or  justification.  
6.   Publication  of  a  Proposed  Solution  to  a  Problem  
        a.   A  Proposed  Solution  must  be  published  in  a  “Qualifying  Outlet,”  which  is  either:  
                  i.   a  refereed  mathematics  publication  of  worldwide  repute  meeting  the  
                         conditions  in  Section  6(e);;  or  
                  ii.   a  publication  meeting  a  relaxed  set  of  conditions  approved  by  the  BOD  
                         following  a  recommendation  from  the  SAB  under  the  procedure  set  out  in  
                         Section  6(f).  
        b.   CMI  will  not  make  recommendations  to  authors  regarding  which  journal  to  submit  a  
             paper  to,  or  how  to  submit  a  paper.  
        c.   CMI  does  not  maintain  a  list  of  publications  that  meet  the  requirements  in  Section  
             4(a),  and  will  not  certify  that  any  particular  publication  meets  its  requirements.  
        d.   CMI  will  not  consider  supplementary  material  submitted  by  the  author  of  a  Proposed  
             Solution.    
        e.   Without  limiting  any  other  provision  in  this  Section,  a  publication  lacking  any  of  the  
             following  characteristics  will  be  deemed  not  to  be  a  Qualifying  Outlet:  
                  i.   an  editorial  board  whose  members  are  named  and  available  for  contact;;  
                  ii.   an  editor  or  editorial  board  member  whose  professional  knowledge  of  the  
                         global  mathematics  community  would  enable  him  or  her  to  identify  an  
                         appropriate  referee  to  review  a  submitted  paper;;    
                  iii.   a  published  refereeing  process  that,  in  the  opinion  of  CMI,  ensures  that  a  
                         submitted  paper  is  reviewed  and  verified  by  appropriate  experts  in  the  field  of  
                         the  Problem;;  or    
                  iv.   inclusion  in  the  list  of  publications  maintained  by  MathSciNet.  
        f.   The  ultimate  decision  as  to  whether  a  publication  qualifies  as  a  “Qualifying  Outlet”  
             shall  reside  in  the  sole  and  unfettered  discretion  of  CMI.    CMI  may,  in  its  discretion,  



{N0530588;;  1}  
  


             relax  or  remove  one  or  more  of  the  conditions  listed  in  Section  6(e)  above  if  it  has  
             received  advice  from  experts  in  the  field  of  the  Problem,  chosen  by  CMI,that  a  
             published  solution  is  likely  to  be  correct.  
7.   Evaluation  of  a  Proposed  Solution  
        a.   After  publication  in  a  Qualifying  Outlet,  a  Proposed  Solution  must  satisfy  the  
             following  two  (2)  stages  of  evaluation  in  order  to  qualify  for  a  Prize.  The  two  (2)  
             stages  must  be  satisfied  sequentially.  
                  i.   First,  a  Proposed  Solution  must  achieve  general  acceptance  in  the  global  
                        mathematics  community,  as  determined  by  CMI  in  its  sole  discretion.      
                           1.   CMI  will  take  reasonable  steps  to  remain  aware  of  Proposed  Solutions  
                                  considered  by  the  global  mathematics  community.      
                                      a.   In  this  connection,  it  is  noted  that  the  Problems  are  hard  
                                           mathematical  problems  of  considerable  interest  to  the  global  
                                           mathematics  community,  and  a  plausible  potential  solution  to  a  
                                           Problem  will  be  effectively  unmissable  to  all  but  the  most  
                                           superficial  monitoring.  
                           2.   The  Proposed  Solution  must  survive  rigorous  examination  by  the  
                                  global  mathematics  community  for  a  minimum  of  two  (2)  years.  
                                  Determination  of  what  constitutes  “rigorous  examination”  shall  lie  
                                  within  the  sole  discretion  of  CMI.      
                           3.   No  CMI-­affiliated  entity  will  accept  invitations,  requests  or  demands  to  
                                  recognize  the  status  of  a  Proposed  Solution.  
                           4.   In  determining  whether  a  Proposed  Solution  has  achieved  general  
                                  acceptance  in  the  global  mathematics  community,  CMI  may  consider:  
                                      a.   the  number  and  quality  of  journal  articles,  books,  and  other  
                                           publications  by  independent  researchers  discussing  the  
                                           Proposed  Solution;;  
                                      b.   the  number  and  quality  of  international  conferences  and  other  
                                           professional  mathematics  gatherings  discussing  the  Proposed  
                                           Solution;;  
                                      c.   the  number  and  quality  of  awards  recognizing  the  Proposed  
                                           Solution;;  and  
                                      d.   any  other  factors  CMI  considers  indicative  of  consensus  in  the  
                                           global  mathematics  community.  
                  ii.   Second,  a  Proposed  Solution  must  satisfy  examination  by  CMI.    
                           1.   If  CMI  determines  that  a  Proposed  Solution  has  achieved  general  
                                  acceptance  in  the  global  mathematics  community,  and  at  least  two  (2)  
                                  years  have  elapsed  since  the  qualifying  publication  of  the  Proposed  
                                  Solution,  CMI  will  decide,  in  its  sole  discretion,  whether  a  Proposed  
                                  Solution  merits  detailed  consideration.      
                           2.   If  CMI  decides  that  detailed  consideration  is  not  merited,  then  CMI  
                                  may  determine  that  no  Prize  be  awarded  for  the  Proposed  Solution  
                                  and  no  further  action  will  be  taken.  




{N0530588;;  1}  
  


                          3.   If  CMI    determines  that  detailed  consideration  is  merited,  then  CMI  will  
                               convene  a  special  advisory  committee  to  examine  the  Proposed  
                               Solution.    The  special  advisory  committee  will  consist  of  no  fewer  than  
                               three  (3)  members,  at  least  two  of  which  are  experts  in  the  area  of  the  
                               Problem,  to  be  selected  by  CMI  in  its  sole  discretion.      
                          4.   The  special  advisory  committee  will  report  within  a  reasonable  time  to  
                               CMI.    Based  on  this  report  and,  if  appropriate,  further  investigation,  
                               CMI  will  determine  whether  a  Prize  should  be  awarded.    
8.   Award  of  a  Prize  
       a.   CMI  may,  in  its  discretion,  determine  that:  
                  i.   no  Prize  be  awarded;;  
                  ii.   a  Prize  be  awarded  to  one  person;;  
                  iii.   a  Prize  be  awarded  to  and  divided  among  multiple  solvers  of  a  Problem  or  
                         their  heirs;;  or  
                  iv.   a  counterexample  resulting  in  a  reformulation  of  the  Problem  merits  a  small,  
                         non-­Prize  award  to  the  author,  as  described  in  Section  5(c)(ii).  
       b.   CMI  will  pay  special  attention  to  the  question  of  whether  a  Prize  solution  depends  
            crucially  on  insights  published  prior  to  the  solution  under  consideration.  CMI  may,  in  
            its  discretion,  recognize  such  prior  work  in  the  Prize  citation,  and/or    recommend  the  
            inclusion  of  the  author  of  prior  work  in  the  award.    
       c.   If  CMI  cannot  come  to  a  decision  about  the  correctness  of  a  solution  to  a  Problem,  its  
            attribution,  or  the  appropriateness  of  an  award,  CMI  may  conclude  that  no  Prize  be  
            awarded  for  a  particular  Problem.  If  new  information  comes  to  light,  CMI  may,  in  its  
            discretion,  reconsider  a  negative  decision  to  award  a  Prize  for  a  Proposed  Solution,  
            but  only  after  an  additional  two  (2)  year  waiting  period  following  the  time  that  the  new  
            information  comes  to  light.    
       d.   Any  person  who  is  not  a  disqualified  person  (as  that  term  is  defined  in  section  4946  
            of  the  Internal  Revenue  Code)  in  connection  with  CMI,  or  a  then-­serving  member  of  
            CMI’s  Scientific  Advisory  Board  or  Board  of  Directors,  may  be  eligible  to  receive  a  
            Prize.  
       e.   Prizes  shall  be  delivered  to  the  recipient  by  no  later  than  ninety  (90)  days  after  the  
            recipient  is  notified  that  such  recipient  has  won  a  Prize.  
         
     This  statement  of  the  Rules  for  the  Millennium  Prize  Problems  has  been  approved  by  the  
     Board  of    Directors  of  the  Clay  Mathematics  Institute.  It  supersedes  all  earlier  statements  of  
     the  Rules.    These  Rules  shall  for  all  purposes  be  construed  in  accordance  with  and  governed  
     by  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Delaware  without  reference  to  its  conflict  or  choice  of  laws  
     principles.  Any  person  applying  for  or  seeking  award  of  a  Prize  irrevocably  and  
     unconditionally  submits,  for  itself  and  its  property,  to  the  nonexclusive  jurisdiction  of  the  
     Superior  Court  of  the  State  of  New  Hampshire  sitting  in  Hillsborough  County  and  of  the  United  
     States  District  Court  for  the  District  of  New  Hampshire,  and  any  appellate  court  from  any  
     thereof,  in  any  action  or  proceeding  arising  out  of  or  relating  to  these  Rules.  
       
       
     Date              26  September,  2018  



{N0530588;;  1}  
