   Problems of the Millennium: the Riemann Hypothesis

                                         E. Bombieri


I. The problem. The Riemann zeta function is the function of the complex
variable s, de’¼üned in the half-plane1 (s) > 1 by the absolutely convergent series
                                                  Ōł×
                                                   1
                                        ╬Č(s) :=              ,
                                                  n=1
                                                        ns

and in the whole complex plane C by analytic continuation. As shown by Riemann,
╬Č(s) extends to C as a meromorphic function with only a simple pole at s = 1 ,
with residue 1 , and satis’¼ües the functional equation
                               s                       1ŌłÆs
                      ŽĆ ŌłÆs/2 ╬ō( ) ╬Č(s) = ŽĆ ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆs)/2 ╬ō(     ) ╬Č(1 ŌłÆ s).                          (1)
                               2                        2
   In an epoch-making memoir published in 1859, Riemann [Ri] obtained an ana-
lytic formula for the number of primes up to a preassigned limit. This formula is
expressed in terms of the zeros of the zeta function, namely the solutions Žü Ōłł C of
the equation ╬Č(Žü) = 0 .
   In this paper, Riemann introduces the function of the complex variable t de’¼üned
by
                                 1                  s
                         ╬Š(t) = s(s ŌłÆ 1) ŽĆ ŌłÆs/2 ╬ō( ) ╬Č(s)
                                 2                  2
with s = 12 +it, and shows that ╬Š(t) is an even entire function of t whose zeros have
imaginary part between ŌłÆi/2 and i/2 . He further states, sketching a proof, that in
the range between 0 and T the function ╬Š(t) has about (T /2ŽĆ) log(T /2ŽĆ) ŌłÆ T /2ŽĆ
zeros. Riemann then continues: ŌĆ£Man ’¼ündet nun in der That etwa so viel reelle
Wurzeln innerhalb dieser Grenzen, und es ist sehr wahrscheinlich, dass alle Wurzeln
reell sind.ŌĆØ, which can be translated as ŌĆ£Indeed, one ’¼ünds between those limits
about that many real zeros, and it is very likely that all zeros are real.ŌĆØ
   The statement that all zeros of the function ╬Š(t) are real is the Riemann hy-
pothesis.
   The function ╬Č(s) has zeros at the negative even integers ŌłÆ2, ŌłÆ4, . . . and one
refers to them as the trivial zeros. The other zeros are the complex numbers 12 + i╬▒
where ╬▒ is a zero of ╬Š(t). Thus, in terms of the function ╬Č(s), we can state
Riemann hypothesis. The nontrivial zeros of ╬Č(s) have real part equal to 12 .
   In the opinion of many mathematicians the Riemann hypothesis, and its exten-
sion to general classes of L -functions, is probably today the most important open
problem in pure mathematics.

II. History and significance of the Riemann hypothesis. For references
pertaining to the early history of zeta functions and the theory of prime numbers,
we refer to Landau [La] and Edwards [Ed].
    1 We denote by (s) and (s) the real and imaginary part of the complex variable s . The use

of the variable s is already in DirichletŌĆÖs famous work of 1837 on primes in arithmetic progression.
2                                         E. BOMBIERI

   The connection between prime numbers and the zeta function, by means of the
celebrated Euler product            
                             ╬Č(s) =  (1 ŌłÆ pŌłÆs )ŌłÆ1
                                               p

valid for (s) > 1 , appears for the ’¼ürst time in EulerŌĆÖs book Introductio in Analysin
Infinitorum, published in 1748. Euler also studied the values of ╬Č(s) at the even
positive and the negative integers, and he divined a functional equation,
                                                                         equivalent
to RiemannŌĆÖs functional equation, for the closely related function        (ŌłÆ1)nŌłÆ1 /ns
(see the interesting account of EulerŌĆÖs work in HardyŌĆÖs book [Hard]).
   The problem of the distribution of prime numbers received attention for the ’¼ürst
time with Gauss and Legendre, at the end of the eighteenth century. Gauss, in a
letter to the astronomer Hencke in 1849, stated that he had found in his early years
that the number ŽĆ(x) of primes up to x is well approximated by the function2
                                             x
                                                 dt
                                   Li(x) =           .
                                             0 log t

   In 1837, Dirichlet proved his famous theorem of the existence of in’¼ünitely many
primes in any arithmetic progression qn+a with q and a positive coprime integers.
   On May 24, 1848, Tchebychev read at the Academy of St. Petersburg his ’¼ürst
memoir on the distribution of prime numbers, later published in 1850. It contains
the ’¼ürst study of the function ŽĆ(x) by analytic methods. Tchebychev begins by
taking the logarithm of the Euler product, obtaining3
                               1                               
                 ŌłÆ     log(1 ŌłÆ s ) + log(s ŌłÆ 1) = log (s ŌłÆ 1)╬Č(s) ,             (2)
                    p
                               p

which is his starting point.
  Next, he proves the integral formula
                                       Ōł×
                             1     1          1  1
               ╬Č(s) ŌłÆ 1 ŌłÆ      =          ( x   ŌłÆ ) eŌłÆx xsŌłÆ1 dx,                            (3)
                          sŌłÆ1     ╬ō(s) 0 e ŌłÆ 1 x
out of which he deduces that (s ŌłÆ 1)╬Č(s) has limit 1 , and also has ’¼ünite derivatives
of any order, as s tends to 1 from the right. He then observes that the derivatives
of any order of the left-hand side of (2) can be written as a fraction in which the
numerator is a polynomial in the derivatives of (s ŌłÆ 1)╬Č(s), and the denominator
is an integral power of (s ŌłÆ 1)╬Č(s), from which it follows that the left-hand side of
(2) has ’¼ünite derivatives of any order, as s tends to 1 from the right. From this,
he is able to  prove that ifk there is an asymptotic formula    for ŽĆ(x) by means of a
’¼ünite sum         ak x/(log x) , up to an order O(x/(log x)N ), then ak = (k ŌłÆ 1)! for
k = 1, . . . , N ŌłÆ 1 . This is precisely the asymptotic expansion of the function Li(x),
thus vindicating GaussŌĆÖs intuition.
   A second paper by Tchebychev gave rigorous proofs of explicit upper and lower
bounds for ŽĆ(x), of the correct order of magnitude. Here, he introduces the count-
ing functions
                                                        ŌłÜ         ŌłÜ
                Žæ(x) =      log p ,     Žł(x) = Žæ(x) + Žæ( 2 x) + Žæ( 3 x) + . . .
                        pŌēżx

    2 The integral is a principal value in the sense of Cauchy.
    3 Tchebychev uses 1 + Žü in place of our s . We write his formulas in modern notation.
           PROBLEMS OF THE MILLENNIUM: THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS                                    3

and proves the identity4                    x
                                           Žł( ) = log [x]! .
                                             n
                                     nŌēżx

From this identity, he ’¼ünally obtains numerical upper and lower bounds for Žł(x),
Žæ(x) and ŽĆ(x).
   Popular variants of TchebychevŌĆÖs method, based on the integrality of suitable
ratios of factorials, originate much later and cannot be ascribed to Tchebychev.
   RiemannŌĆÖs memoir on ŽĆ(x) is really astonishing for the novelty of ideas intro-
duced. He ’¼ürst writes ╬Č(s) using the integral formula, valid for (s) > 1 :
                                        Ōł×
                                   1         eŌłÆx
                           ╬Č(s) =                  xsŌłÆ1 dx,                     (4)
                                  ╬ō(s) 0 1 ŌłÆ eŌłÆx

and then deforms the contour of integration in the complex plane, so as to obtain
a representation valid for any s. This gives the analytic continuation and the
functional equation of ╬Č(s). Then he gives a second proof of the functional equation
in the symmetric form (1), introduces the function ╬Š(t) and states some of its
properties as a function of the complex variable t.
   Riemann continues by writing the logarithm of the Euler product as an integral
transform, valid for (s) > 1 :
                                         Ōł×
                          1                 
                             log ╬Č(s) =       (x)xŌłÆsŌłÆ1 dx                        (5)
                          s              1

where
                                     1 ŌłÜ        1 ŌłÜ
                            (x) = ŽĆ(x) +ŽĆ( 2 x) + ŽĆ( 3 x) + . . . .
                                      2          3
                                             
By Fourier inversion, he is able to express (x) as a complex integral, and compute
it using the calculus of residues. The residues occur at the singularities of log ╬Č(s)
at s = 1 and at the zeros of ╬Č(s). Finally an inversion formula expressing ŽĆ(x) in
           
terms of (x) yields RiemannŌĆÖs formula.
   This was a remarkable achievement which immediately attracted much attention.
Even if RiemannŌĆÖs initial line of attack may have been in’¼éuenced by Tchebychev
(we ’¼ünd several explicit references to Tchebychev in RiemannŌĆÖs unpublished Nach-
lass5 ) his great contribution was to see how the distribution of prime numbers is
determined by the complex zeros of the zeta function.
   At ’¼ürst sight, the Riemann hypothesis appears to be only a plausible interesting
property of the special function ╬Č(s), and Riemann himself seems to take that view.
He writes: ŌĆ£Hiervon wa╠łre allerdings ein strenger Beweis zu wu╠łnschen; ich habe
indess die Aufsuchung desselben nach einigen ’¼éu╠łchtigen vergeblichen Versuchen
vorla╠łu’¼üg bei Seite gelassen, da er fu╠łr den na╠łchsten Zweck meiner Untersuchung
entbehrlich schien.ŌĆØ, which can be translated as ŌĆ£Without doubt it would be desir-
able to have a rigorous proof of this proposition; however I have left this research
aside for the time being after some quick unsuccessful attempts, because it appears
to be unnecessary for the immediate goal of my study.ŌĆØ
   4 Here [x] denotes the integral part of x .
    5 The Nachlass consists of RiemannŌĆÖs unpublished notes and is preserved in the mathematical

library of the University of Go╠łttingen. The part regarding the zeta function was analyzed in depth
by C.L. Siegel [Sie].
4                                    E. BOMBIERI

   On the other hand, one should not draw from this comment the conclusion that
the Riemann hypothesis was for Riemann only a casual remark of minor interest.
The validity of the Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to saying that the deviation
of the number of primes from the mean Li(x) is
                                               ŌłÜ       
                            ŽĆ(x) = Li(x) + O     x log x ;

the error term cannot be improvedŌłÜ     by much, since it is known to oscillate in both
directions to order at least Li( x) log log log x (Littlewood). In view of RiemannŌĆÖs
comments at the end of his memoir about the approximation of ŽĆ(x) by Li(x), it
is quite likely that he saw how his hypothesis was central to the question of how
good an approximation to ŽĆ(x) one may get from his formula.
    The failure of the Riemann hypothesis would create havoc in the distribution of
prime numbers. This fact alone singles out the Riemann hypothesis as the main
open question of prime number theory.
    The Riemann hypothesis has become a central problem of pure mathematics, and
not just because of its fundamental consequences for the law of distribution of prime
numbers. One reason is that the Riemann zeta function is not an isolated object,
rather is the prototype of a general class of functions, called L -functions, associated
with algebraic (automorphic representations) or arithmetical objects (arithmetic
varieties); we shall refer to them as global L -functions. They are Dirichlet series
with a suitable Euler product, and are expected to satisfy an appropriate functional
equation and a Riemann hypothesis. The factors of the Euler product may also
be considered as some kind of zeta functions of a local nature, which also should
satisfy an appropriate Riemann hypothesis (the so-called Ramanujan property).
The most important properties of the algebraic or arithmetical objects underlying
an L -function can or should be described in terms of the location of its zeros and
poles, and values at special points.
    The consequences of a Riemann hypothesis for global L -functions are important
and varied. We mention here, to indicate the variety of situations to which it can
be applied, an extremely strong e’¼Ćective form of TchebotarevŌĆÖs density theorem
for number ’¼üelds, the non-trivial representability of 0 by a non-singular cubic form
in 5 or more variables (provided it satis’¼ües the appropriate necessary congruence
conditions for solubility, Hooley), and MillerŌĆÖs deterministic polynomial time pri-
mality test. On the other hand, many deep results in number theory which are
consequences of a general Riemann hypothesis can be shown to hold independently
of it, thus adding considerable weight to the validity of the conjecture.
    It is outside the scope of this article even to outline the de’¼ünition of global L -
functions, referring instead to Iwaniec and Sarnak [IS] for a survey of the expected
properties satis’¼üed by them; it su’¼āces here to say that the study of the analytic
properties of these functions presents extraordinary di’¼āculties.
    Already the analytic continuation of L -functions as meromorphic or entire func-
tions is known only in special cases. For example, the functional equation for the
L -function of an elliptic curve over Q and for its twists by Dirichlet characters is an
easy consequence of, and is equivalent to, the existence of a parametrization of the
curve by means of modular functions for a Hecke group ╬ō0 (N ); the real di’¼āculty
lies in establishing this modularity. No one knows how to prove this functional
equation by analytic methods. However the modularity of elliptic curves over Q
has been established directly, ’¼ürst in the semistable case in the spectacular work
         PROBLEMS OF THE MILLENNIUM: THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS                         5

of Wiles [Wi] and Taylor and Wiles [TW] leading to the solution of FermatŌĆÖs Last
Theorem, and then in the general case in a recent preprint by Breuil, Conrad,
Diamond and Taylor.
   Not all L -functions are directly associated to arithmetic or geometric objects.
The simplest example of L -functions not of arithmetic/geometric nature are those
arising from Maass waveforms for a Riemann surface X uniformized by an arith-
metic subgroup ╬ō of PGL(2, R). They are pull-backs f (z), to the universal cov-
ering space (z) > 0 of X , of simultaneous eigenfunctions for the action of the
hyperbolic Laplacian and of the Hecke operators on X .
   The most important case is again the group ╬ō0 (N ). In this case one can intro-
duce a notion of primitive waveform, analogous to the notion of primitive Dirichlet
character, meaning that the waveform is not induced from another waveform for a
╬ō0 (N  ) with N  a proper divisor of N . For a primitive waveform, the action of
the Hecke operators Tn is de’¼üned for every n and the L -function can be de’¼üned
as     ╬╗f (n)nŌłÆs where ╬╗f (n) is the eigenvalue of Tn acting on the waveform f (z).
Such an L -function has an Euler product and satis’¼ües a functional equation anal-
ogous to that for ╬Č(s). It is also expected that it satis’¼ües a Riemann hypothesis.
   Not a single example of validity or failure of a Riemann hypothesis for an L -
function is known up to this date. The Riemann hypothesis for ╬Č(s) does not seem
to be any easier than for Dirichlet L -functions (except possibly for non-trivial
real zeros), leading to the view that its solution may require attacking much more
general problems, by means of entirely new ideas.

III. Evidence for the Riemann hypothesis. Notwithstanding some skepticism
voiced in the past, based perhaps more on the number of failed attempts to a
proof rather than on solid heuristics, it is fair to say that today there is quite a
bit of evidence in its favor. We have already emphasized that the general Riemann
hypothesis is consistent with our present knowledge of number theory. There is
also speci’¼üc evidence of a more direct nature, which we shall now examine.
   First, strong numerical evidence.
   Interestingly enough, the ’¼ürst numerical computation of the ’¼ürst few zeros of
the zeta function already appears in RiemannŌĆÖs Nachlass. A rigorous veri’¼ücation of
the Riemann hypothesis in a given range can be done numerically as follows. The
number N (T ) of zeros of ╬Č(s) in the rectangle R with vertices at ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ iT, 2 ŌłÆ
iT, 2 + iT, ŌłÆ1 + iT is given by CauchyŌĆÖs integral
                                          
                                        1       ╬Č
                          N (T ) ŌłÆ 1 =        ŌłÆ (s) ds,
                                       2ŽĆi ŌłéR ╬Č

provided T is not the imaginary part of a zero (the ŌłÆ1 in the left-hand side of
this formula is due to the simple pole of ╬Č(s) at s = 1 ). The zeta function and
its derivative can be computed to arbitrary high precision using the MacLaurin
summation formula or the Riemann-Siegel formula [Sie]; the quantity N (T ) ŌłÆ 1 ,
which is an integer, is then computed exactly by dividing by 2ŽĆi the numerical
evaluation of the integral, and rounding o’¼Ć its real part to the nearest integer (this
is only of theoretical interest and much better methods are available in practice for
computing N (T ) exactly). On the other hand, since ╬Š(t) is continuous and real
for real t, there will be a zero of odd order between any two points at which ╬Š(t)
changes sign. By judiciously choosing sample points, one can detect sign changes
6                                           E. BOMBIERI

of ╬Š(t) in the interval [ŌłÆT, T ]. If the number of sign changes equals N (T ), one
concludes that all zeros of ╬Č(s) in R are simple and satisfy the Riemann hypothesis.
In this way, it has been shown by van de Lune, te Riele and Winter [LRW] that
the ’¼ürst 1.5 billion zeros of ╬Č(s), arranged by increasing positive imaginary part,
are simple and satisfy the Riemann hypothesis.
   The Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to the statement that all local maxima
of ╬Š(t) are positive and all local minima are negative, and it has been suggested
that if a counterexample exists then it should be in the neighborhood of unusually
large peaks of |╬Č( 12 + it)|. The above range for T is T Ōł╝= 5 ├Ś 108 and is not large
enough for |╬Č( 2 + it)| to exhibit these peaks which are known to occur eventually.
               1

However, further calculations done by Odlyzko [Od] in selected intervals show that
the Riemann hypothesis holds for over 3 ├Ś 108 zeros at heights up to6 2 ├Ś 1020 .
These calculations also strongly support independent conjectures by Dyson and
Montgomery [Mo] concerning the distribution of spacings between zeros.
   Computing zeros of L -functions is more di’¼ācult, but this has been done in sev-
eral cases, which include examples of Dirichlet L -functions, L -functions of elliptic
curves, Maass L -functions and nonabelian Artin L -functions arising from number
’¼üelds of small degree. No exception to a generalized Riemann hypothesis has been
found in this way.
   Second, it is known that hypothetical exceptions to the Riemann hypothesis
must be rare if we move away from the line (s) = 12 .
   Let N (╬▒, T ) be the number of zeros of ╬Č(s) in the rectangle ╬▒ Ōēż (s) Ōēż 2 ,
0 Ōēż (s) Ōēż T . The prototype result goes back to Bohr and Landau in 1914, namely
N (╬▒, T ) = O(T ) for any ’¼üxed ╬▒ with 12 < ╬▒ < 1 . A signi’¼ücant improvement of the
result of Bohr and Landau was obtained by Carlson in 1920, obtaining the density
theorem N (╬▒, T ) = O(T 4╬▒(1ŌłÆ╬▒)+╬Ą ) for any ’¼üxed ╬Ą > 0 . The fact that the exponent
here is strictly less than 1 is important for arithmetic applications, for example
in the study of primes in short intervals. The exponent in CarlsonŌĆÖs theorem has
gone through several successive re’¼ünements for various ranges of ╬▒ , in particular
in the range 34 < ╬▒ < 1 . Curiously enough, the best exponent known up to date
in the range 12 < ╬▒ Ōēż 34 remains InghamŌĆÖs exponent 3(1 ŌłÆ ╬▒)/(2 ŌłÆ ╬▒), obtained in
1940. For references to these results, the reader may consult the recent revision by
Heath-Brown of the classical monograph of Titchmarsh [Ti], and the book by Ivic
[Iv].
   Third, it is known that more than 40 % of nontrivial zeros of ╬Č(s) are simple and
satisfy the Riemann hypothesis (Selberg [Sel], Levinson [Le], Conrey [Conr]). Most
of these results have been extended to other L -functions, including all Dirichlet
L -functions and L -functions associated to modular forms or Maass waveforms.

IV. Further evidence: varieties over finite fields. It may be said that the
best evidence in favor of the Riemann hypothesis derives from the corresponding
theory which has been developed in the context of algebraic varieties over ’¼ünite
’¼üelds. The simplest situation is as follows.
   Let C be a nonsingular projective curve over a ’¼ünite ’¼üeld Fq with q = pa
elements, of characteristic p. Let Div(C) be the additive group of divisors on C
    6 The most recent calculations by Odlyzko, which are approaching completion, will explore

completely the interval [1022 , 1022 + 1010 ] .
          PROBLEMS OF THE MILLENNIUM: THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS                          7

                                                           
de’¼üned over Fq , in other words formal ’¼ünite sums a =         ai Pi with ai Ōłł Z and
Pi points of C de’¼üned over a ’¼ünite extension of Fq , such that Žå(a) = a where Žå
is the Frobenius endomorphism
                                 on C raising coordinates to the q -th power. The
quantity deg(a) =       ai is the degree of the divisor a . The divisor a is called
e’¼Ćective if every ai is a positive integer; in this case, we write a > 0 . Finally, a
prime divisor p is a positive divisor which cannot be expressed as the sum of two
positive divisors. By de’¼ünition, the norm of a divisor a is N a = q deg(a) .
   The zeta function of the curve C , as de’¼üned by E. Artin, H. Hasse and F.K.
Schmidt, is
                                            1
                                 ╬Č(s, C) =           .
                                           a>0
                                                N as

This function has an Euler product
                                            
                                ╬Č(s, C) =    (1 ŌłÆ N pŌłÆs )ŌłÆ1
                                             p

and a functional equation

                         q (gŌłÆ1)s ╬Č(s, C) = q (gŌłÆ1)(1ŌłÆs) ╬Č(1 ŌłÆ s, C)

where g is the genus of the curve C ; it is a consequence of the Riemann-Roch
theorem. The function ╬Č(s, C) is a rational function of the variable t = q ŌłÆs ,
hence is periodic7 with period 2ŽĆi/ log q , and has simple poles at the points s =
2ŽĆim/ log q and s = 1 + 2ŽĆim/ log q for m Ōłł Z. Expressed in terms of the variable
t, the zeta function becomes a rational function Z(t, C) of t, with simple poles at
t = 1 and t = q ŌłÆ1 . The use of the variable t, rather than q ŌłÆs , is more natural in
the geometric case and we refer to Zeta functions, with a capital Z, to indicate the
corresponding objects.
    The Riemann hypothesis for ╬Č(s, C) is the statement that all its zeros have real
part equal to 12 ; in terms of the Zeta function Z(t, C), which has a numerator of
                                            1
degree 2g , has zeros of absolute value q ŌłÆ 2 .
    This is easy to verify if g = 0 , because the numerator is 1 . If g = 1 , a proof
was obtained by Hasse in 1934. The general case of arbitrary genus g was ’¼ünally
settled by Weil in the early 1940s (see his letter to E. Artin of July 10, 1942 where
he gives a complete sketch of the theory of correspondences on a curve [We1]); his
results were eventually published in book form in 1948 [We2].
    Through his researches, Weil was led to the formulation of sweeping conjectures
about Zeta functions of general algebraic varieties over ’¼ünite ’¼üelds, relating their
properties to the topological structure of the underlying algebraic variety. Here
the Riemann hypothesis, in a simpli’¼üed form, is the statement that the reciprocals
of the zeros and poles of the Zeta function (the so-called characteristic roots) have
absolute value q d/2 with d a positive integer or 0 , and are interpreted as eigenvalues
of the Frobenius automorphism acting on the cohomology of the variety. After
M. Artin, A. Grothendieck and J.-L. Verdier developed the fundamental tool of
e╠ütale cohomology, the proof of the corresponding Riemann hypothesis for Zeta
functions of arbitrary varieties over ’¼ünite ’¼üelds was ’¼ünally obtained by Deligne
[Del1], [Del2]. DeligneŌĆÖs theorem surely ranks as one of the crowning achievements
  7 Similarly, ╬Č(s) is almost periodic in any half-plane (s) Ōēź 1 + ╬┤ , ╬┤ > 0 .
8                                         E. BOMBIERI

of twentieth century mathematics. Its numerous applications to the solution of long-
standing problems in number theory, algebraic geometry and discrete mathematics
are witness to the signi’¼ücance of these general Riemann hypotheses.
   In our opinion, these results in the geometric setting cannot be ignored as not
relevant to the understanding of the classical Riemann hypothesis; the analogies
are too compelling to be dismissed outright.

V. Further evidence: the explicit formula. A conceptually important gener-
alization of RiemannŌĆÖs explicit formula for ŽĆ(x), obtained by Weil [We3] in 1952,
o’¼Ćers a clue to what may lie still undiscovered behind the problem.
   Consider the class W of complex-valued functions f (x) on the positive half-line
R+ , continuous and continuously di’¼Ćerentiable except for ’¼ünitely many points at
which both f (x) and f  (x) have at most a discontinuity of the ’¼ürst kind, and at
which the value of f (x) and f  (x) is de’¼üned as the average of the right and left
limits there. Suppose also that there is ╬┤ > 0 such that f (x) = O(x╬┤ ) as x ŌåÆ 0+
and f (x) = O(xŌłÆ1ŌłÆ╬┤ ) as x ŌåÆ +Ōł×.
   Let f(s) be the Mellin transform
                                               Ōł×
                                                                dx
                                 f(s) =             f (x) xs      ,
                                                0               x

which is an analytic function of s for ŌłÆ╬┤ < (s) < 1 + ╬┤ .
  For the Riemann zeta function, WeilŌĆÖs formula can be stated as follows. Let
╬ø(n) = log p if n = pa is a power of a prime p, and 0 otherwise. We have
Explicit Formula. For f Ōłł W we have

                                     Ōł×
                                                               1 1
      f(0) ŌłÆ       f(Žü) + f(1) =         ╬ø(n) f (n) +         f ( ) + (log 4ŽĆ + ╬│)f (1)
                Žü                     n=1
                                                                n n
                                           Ōł×
                                                              1 1     2         dx
                                      +             f (x) +    f ( ) ŌłÆ f (1)         .
                                          1                   x x     x      x ŌłÆ xŌłÆ1

Here the ’¼ürst sum ranges over all nontrivial zeros of ╬Č(s) and is understood as
                                                    
                                       lim                 f(Žü).
                                      T ŌåÆ+Ōł×
                                                |(Žü)|<T


   In his paper, Weil showed that there is a corresponding formula for zeta and
L -functions of number ’¼üelds as well as for Zeta functions of curves over ’¼ünite ’¼üelds.
The terms in the right-hand side of the equation can be written as a sum of terms
of local nature, associated to the absolute values of the underlying number ’¼üeld, or
function ’¼üeld in the case of curves over a ’¼üeld of positive characteristic. Moreover,
in the latter case the explicit formula can be deduced from the Lefschetz ’¼üxed point
formula, applied to the Frobenius endomorphism on the curve C . The three terms
                                       
in the left-hand side, namely f(0),      f (Žü), f(1), now correspond to the trace of
the Frobenius automorphism on the l -adic cohomology of C (the interesting term

   f (Žü) corresponds to the trace on H 1 ), while the right-hand side corresponds
to the number of ’¼üxed points of the Frobenius endomorphism, namely the prime
divisors of degree 1 on C .
           PROBLEMS OF THE MILLENNIUM: THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS                                   9

   Weil also proved that the Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to the negativity of
the right-hand side for all functions f (x) of type
                                              Ōł×
                                   f (x) =         g(xy) g(y) dy,
                                             0

whenever g Ōłł W satis’¼ües the additional conditions
                              Ōł×                    Ōł×
                                         dx
                                    g(x)    =            g(x) dx = 0.
                               0         x          0

In the geometric case of curves over a ’¼ünite ’¼üeld, this negativity is a rather easy
consequence of the algebraic index theorem for surfaces, namely:
Algebraic Index Theorem. Let X be a projective nonsingular surface defined
over an algebraically closed field. Then the self-intersection quadratic form (D ┬Ę D),
restricted to the group of divisors D on X of degree 0 in the projective embedding
of X , is negative semidefinite.
   The algebraic index theorem for surfaces is essentially due to Severi8 in 1906
[Sev,┬¦2,Teo.I]. The proof uses the Riemann-Roch theorem on X and the ’¼üniteness
of families of curves on X of a given degree; no other proof by algebraic methods is
known up to now, although much later several authors independently rediscovered
SeveriŌĆÖs argument.
   The algebraic index theorem for nonsingular projective varieties of even dimen-
sion over the complex numbers was ’¼ürst formulated and proved by Hodge, as a
consequence of his theory of harmonic forms. No algebraic proof of HodgeŌĆÖs theo-
rem is known, and it remains a fundamental open problem to extend it to the case
of varieties over ’¼üelds of positive characteristic.
   The work of Montgomery [Mo], Odlyzko [Od] and Rudnick and Sarnak [RS] on
correlations for spacings of zeros of ╬Š(t) suggests that L -functions can be grouped
into a few families, in each of which the spacing correlation is universal; the conjec-
tured spacing correlation is the same as for the limiting distribution of eigenvalues
of random orthogonal, unitary or symplectic matrices in suitable universal families,
as the dimension goes to Ōł×. All this is compatible with the view expressed by
Hilbert and Po╠ülya that the zeros of ╬Š(t) could be the eigenvalues of a self-adjoint
linear operator on an appropriate Hilbert space. It should also be noted that a
corresponding unconditional theory for the spacing correlations of characteristic
roots of Zeta functions of families of algebraic varieties over a ’¼ünite ’¼üeld, has been
developed by Katz and Sarnak [KS], using methods introduced by Deligne in his
proof of the Riemann hypothesis for varieties over ’¼ünite ’¼üelds. Thus the problem
of spacing correlations for zeros of L -functions appears to lie very deep.
   All this leads to several basic questions.
   Is there a theory in the global case, playing the same role as cohomology does
for Zeta functions of varieties over a ’¼üeld of positive characteristic? Is there an
analogue of a Frobenius automorphism in the classical case? Is there a general
index theorem by which one can prove the classical Riemann hypothesis? We are
   8 Severi showed that a divisor D on X is algebraically equivalent to 0 up to torsion, if it has

degree 0 and (D ┬Ę D) = 0 . His proof holds, without modifications, under the weaker assumption
(D ┬Ę D) Ōēź 0 , which yields the index theorem.
10                                 E. BOMBIERI

here in the realm of conjectures and speculation. In the adelic setting propounded
by Tate and Weil, the papers [Conn], [Den], [Hara] o’¼Ćer glimpses of a possible setup
for these basic problems.
   On the other hand, there are L -functions, such as those attached to Maass
waveforms, which do not seem to originate from geometry and for which we still
expect a Riemann hypothesis to be valid. For them, we do not have algebraic and
geometric models to guide our thinking, and entirely new ideas may be needed to
study these intriguing objects.

                     Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ 08540


                                 References

[Conn] A. Connes, Trace formula in noncommutative geometry and the zeros of
the Riemann zeta function, Selecta Math. (NS) 5 (1999), 29ŌĆō106.

[Conr] J.B. Conrey, More than two ’¼üfths of the zeros of the Riemann zeta
function are on the critical line, J. reine angew. Math. 399 (1989), 1ŌĆō26.

[Del1] P. Deligne, La Conjecture de Weil I, Publications Math. IHES 43 (1974),
273ŌĆō308.

[Del2] P. Deligne, La Conjecture de Weil II, Publications Math. IHES 52
(1980), 137ŌĆō252.

[Den]   C. Deninger, Some analogies between number theory and dynamical
systems on foliated spaces, Proc. Int. Congress Math. Berlin 1998, Vol. I, 163ŌĆō
186.

[Ed]    H.M. Edwards, RiemannŌĆÖs Zeta Function, Academic Press, New York -
London 1974.

[Hara] S. Haran, Index theory, potential theory, and the Riemann hypothesis,
L -functions and Arithmetic, Durham 1990, LMS Lecture Notes 153 (1991), 257ŌĆō
270.

[Hard]   G.H. Hardy, Divergent Series, Oxford Univ. Press 1949, Ch. II, 23ŌĆō26.

[IS]     H. Iwaniec and P. Sarnak, Perspectives on the Analytic Theory of
L -Functions, to appear in proceedings of the conference Visions 2000, Tel Aviv.

[Iv]    A. Ivi c╠ī , The Riemann Zeta-Function - The Theory of the Riemann Zeta-
Function with Applications, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York - Chichester -
Brisbane - Toronto - Singapore 1985.

[KS]     N.M. Katz and P. Sarnak, Random matrices, Frobenius eigenvalues
and monodromy, Amer. Math. Soc. Coll. Publ. 49, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence
RI 1999.

[La]    E. Landau, Primzahlen, Zwei Bd., IInd ed., with an Appendix by Dr.
Paul T. Bateman, Chelsea, New York 1953.
         PROBLEMS OF THE MILLENNIUM: THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS                       11

[Le]     N. Levinson, More than one-third of the zeros of the Riemann zeta-
function are on Žā = 1/2 , Adv. Math. 13 (1974), 383ŌĆō436.
[LRW] J. van de Lune, J.J. te Riele and D.T. Winter, On the zeros of
the Riemann zeta function in the critical strip, IV, Math. of Comp. 46 (1986),
667ŌĆō681.
[Mo]     H.L. Montgomery, Distribution of the Zeros of the Riemann Zeta Func-
tion, Proceedings Int. Cong. Math. Vancouver 1974, Vol. I, 379ŌĆō381.
[Od]    A.M. Odlyzko, Supercomputers and the Riemann zeta function, Su-
percomputing 89: Supercomputing Structures & Computations, Proc. 4-th Intern.
Conf. on Supercomputing, L.P. Kartashev and S.I. Kartashev (eds.), International
Supercomputing Institute 1989, 348ŌĆō352.
[Ri]     B. Riemann, Ueber die Anzahl der Primzahlen unter einer gegebenen
Gro╠łsse, Monat. der Ko╠łnigl. Preuss. Akad. der Wissen. zu Berlin aus der Jahre
1859 (1860), 671ŌĆō680; also, Gesammelte math. Werke und wissensch. Nachlass, 2.
Au’¼é. 1892, 145ŌĆō155.
[RS]     Z. Rudnick and P. Sarnak, Zeros of principal L -functions and random
matrix theory, Duke Math. J. 82 (1996), 269ŌĆō322.
[Sel]    A. Selberg, On the zeros of the zeta-function of Riemann, Der Kong.
Norske Vidensk. Selsk. Forhand. 15 (1942), 59ŌĆō62; also, Collected Papers, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin - Heidelberg - New York 1989, Vol. I, 156ŌĆō159.
[Sev]    F. Severi, Sulla totalita╠Ć delle curve algebriche tracciate sopra una super-
’¼ücie algebrica, Math. Annalen 62 (1906), 194ŌĆō225.
[Sie]    C.L. Siegel, U╠łber Riemanns Nachla├¤ zur analytischen Zahlentheorie,
Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und Physik 2
(1932), 45ŌĆō80; also Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Springer-Verlag, Berlin - Heidelberg
- New York 1966, Bd. I, 275ŌĆō310.
[Ti]     E.C. Titchmarsh, The Theory of the Riemann Zeta Function, 2nd ed.
revised by R.D. Heath-Brown, Oxford Univ. Press 1986.
[TW]     R. Taylor and A. Wiles, Ring theoretic properties of certain Hecke
algebras, Annals of Math. 141 (1995), 553ŌĆō572.
[We1]    A. Weil, ┼Æuvres ScientifiquesŌĆōCollected Papers, corrected 2nd printing,
Springer-Verlag, New York - Berlin 1980, Vol. I, 280-298.
[We2]  A. Weil, Sur les Courbes Alge╠übriques et les Varie╠üte╠üs qui sŌĆÖen de╠üduisent,
Hermann & C ie , Paris 1948.
[We3]     A. Weil, Sur les ŌĆ£formules explicitesŌĆØ de la the╠üorie des nombres premiers,
Meddelanden Fra╠Ŗn Lunds Univ. Mat. Sem. (dedie╠ü a╠Ć M. Riesz), (1952), 252-
265; also, ┼Æuvres ScientifiquesŌĆōCollected Papers, corrected 2nd printing, Springer-
Verlag, New York - Berlin 1980, Vol. II, 48ŌĆō61.
[Wi]     A. Wiles, Modular elliptic curves and FermatŌĆÖs Last Theorem, Annals
of Math. 141 (1995), 443ŌĆō551.
